Readme.md, before:

DapraCadapra - a simple object mapper for .Net
========================================

Additions to Dapper Dot Net:
In the core SqlMapper object, I've added 3 methods so far.
Update -- takes parameters of table name, column name, value, and a where calause.
	-- Following stanard Dapper usage, your models shoudl have names matching tables and properties matching columns, so this method could be called like:
	db.update(object.GetType().GetName().ToString(), object.GetProperty("property").GetName().ToString, "value", "field = x");
ExecuteMany -- Works exactly like the Execute method in Dapper, except that it takes a list of strings (where each string is a sql query) and will execute them all on one trip to the database.
Insert -- Documentation coming soon.

Release Notes
-------------

This project is forked from Dapper Dot Net available at:
[link](http://stackexchange.github.io/DapraCadapra-dot-net/)


Features
--------
DapraCadapra is a [NuGet library](https://www.nuget.org/packages/DapraCadapra) that you can add in to your project that will extend your `IDbConnection` interface.

It provides 3 helpers:

Execute a query and map the results to a strongly typed List
------------------------------------------------------------

Note: all extension methods assume the connection is already open, they will fail if the connection is closed.

```csharp
public static IEnumerable<T> Query<T>(this IDbConnection cnn, string sql, object param = null, SqlTransaction transaction = null, bool buffered = true)
```
Example usage:

```csharp
public class Dog
{
    public int? Age { get; set; }
    public Guid Id { get; set; }
    public string Name { get; set; }
    public float? Weight { get; set; }

    public int IgnoredProperty { get { return 1; } }
}            
            
var guid = Guid.NewGuid();
var dog = connection.Query<Dog>("select Age = @Age, Id = @Id", new { Age = (int?)null, Id = guid });
            
dog.Count()
    .IsEqualTo(1);

dog.First().Age
    .IsNull();

dog.First().Id
    .IsEqualTo(guid);
```

Execute a query and map it to a list of dynamic objects
-------------------------------------------------------

```csharp
public static IEnumerable<dynamic> Query (this IDbConnection cnn, string sql, object param = null, SqlTransaction transaction = null, bool buffered = true)
```
This method will execute SQL and return a dynamic list.

Example usage:

```csharp
var rows = connection.Query("select 1 A, 2 B union all select 3, 4");

((int)rows[0].A)
   .IsEqualTo(1);

((int)rows[0].B)
   .IsEqualTo(2);

((int)rows[1].A)
   .IsEqualTo(3);

((int)rows[1].B)
    .IsEqualTo(4);
```

Execute a Command that returns no results
-----------------------------------------

```csharp
public static int Execute(this IDbConnection cnn, string sql, object param = null, SqlTransaction transaction = null)
```

Example usage:

```csharp
connection.Execute(@"
  set nocount on 
  create table #t(i int) 
  set nocount off 
  insert #t 
  select @a a union all select @b 
  set nocount on 
  drop table #t", new {a=1, b=2 })
   .IsEqualTo(2);
```

Execute a Command multiple times
--------------------------------

The same signature also allows you to conveniently and efficiently execute a command multiple times (for example to bulk-load data)

Example usage:

```csharp
connection.Execute(@"insert MyTable(colA, colB) values (@a, @b)",
    new[] { new { a=1, b=1 }, new { a=2, b=2 }, new { a=3, b=3 } }
  ).IsEqualTo(3); // 3 rows inserted: "1,1", "2,2" and "3,3"
```
This works for any parameter that implements IEnumerable<T> for some T.

Performance
-----------

A key feature of DapraCadapra is performance. The following metrics show how long it takes to execute 500 SELECT statements against a DB and map the data returned to objects.

The performance tests are broken in to 3 lists:

- POCO serialization for frameworks that support pulling static typed objects from the DB. Using raw SQL.
- Dynamic serialization for frameworks that support returning dynamic lists of objects.
- Typical framework usage. Often typical framework usage differs from the optimal usage performance wise. Often it will not involve writing SQL.

### Performance of SELECT mapping over 500 iterations - POCO serialization

<table>
  <tr>
  	<th>Method</th>
		<th>Duration</th>		
		<th>Remarks</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Hand coded (using a <code>SqlDataReader</code>)</td>
		<td>47ms</td>
		<td rowspan="9"><a href="http://www.toptensoftware.com/blog/posts/94-PetaPoco-More-Speed">Can be faster</a></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>DapraCadapra <code>ExecuteMapperQuery<Post></code></td>
		<td>49ms</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td><a href="https://github.com/ServiceStack/ServiceStack.OrmLite">ServiceStack.OrmLite</a> (QueryById)</td>
		<td>50ms</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td><a href="http://www.toptensoftware.com/petapoco/">PetaPoco</a></td>
		<td>52ms</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>BLToolkit</td>
		<td>80ms</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>SubSonic CodingHorror</td>
		<td>107ms</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>NHibernate SQL</td>
		<td>104ms</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Linq 2 SQL <code>ExecuteQuery</code></td>
		<td>181ms</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Entity framework <code>ExecuteStoreQuery</code></td>
		<td>631ms</td>
	</tr>
</table>

### Performance of SELECT mapping over 500 iterations - dynamic serialization

<table>
	<tr>
		<th>Method</th>
		<th>Duration</th>		
		<th>Remarks</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>DapraCadapra <code>ExecuteMapperQuery</code> (dynamic)</td>
		<td>48ms</td>
		<td rowspan="3">&nbsp;</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td><a href="https://github.com/FransBouma/Massive">Massive</a></td>
		<td>52ms</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td><a href="https://github.com/markrendle/Simple.Data">Simple.Data</a></td>
		<td>95ms</td>
	</tr>
</table>


### Performance of SELECT mapping over 500 iterations - typical usage

<table>
	<tr>
		<th>Method</th>
		<th>Duration</th>		
		<th>Remarks</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Linq 2 SQL CompiledQuery</td>
		<td>81ms</td>
		<td>Not super typical involves complex code</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>NHibernate HQL</td>
		<td>118ms</td>
		<td>&nbsp;</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Linq 2 SQL</td>
		<td>559ms</td>
		<td>&nbsp;</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Entity framework</td>
		<td>859ms</td>
		<td>&nbsp;</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>SubSonic ActiveRecord.SingleOrDefault</td>
		<td>3619ms</td>
		<td>&nbsp;</td>
	</tr>
</table>

Performance benchmarks are available [here](https://github.com/StackExchange/DapraCadapra-dot-net/blob/master/DapraCadapra.Tests/PerformanceTests.cs).

Feel free to submit patches that include other ORMs - when running benchmarks, be sure to compile in Release and not attach a debugger (ctrl F5).

Alternatively, you might prefer Frans Bouma's [RawDataAccessBencher](https://github.com/FransBouma/RawDataAccessBencher) test suite.

Parameterized queries
---------------------

Parameters are passed in as anonymous classes. This allow you to name your parameters easily and gives you the ability to simply cut-and-paste SQL snippets and run them in Query analyzer.

```csharp
new {A = 1, B = "b"} // A will be mapped to the param @A, B to the param @B 
```

List Support
------------
DapraCadapra allow you to pass in IEnumerable<int> and will automatically parameterize your query.

For example:

```csharp
connection.Query<int>("select * from (select 1 as Id union all select 2 union all select 3) as X where Id in @Ids", new { Ids = new int[] { 1, 2, 3 });
```

Will be translated to:

```csharp
select * from (select 1 as Id union all select 2 union all select 3) as X where Id in (@Ids1, @Ids2, @Ids3)" // @Ids1 = 1 , @Ids2 = 2 , @Ids2 = 3
```

Buffered vs Unbuffered readers
---------------------
DapraCadapra's default behavior is to execute your sql and buffer the entire reader on return. This is ideal in most cases as it minimizes shared locks in the db and cuts down on db network time.

However when executing huge queries you may need to minimize memory footprint and only load objects as needed. To do so pass, buffered: false into the Query method.

Multi Mapping
---------------------
DapraCadapra allows you to map a single row to multiple objects. This is a key feature if you want to avoid extraneous querying and eager load associations.

Example:

```csharp
var sql = 
@"select * from #Posts p 
left join #Users u on u.Id = p.OwnerId 
Order by p.Id";
 
var data = connection.Query<Post, User, Post>(sql, (post, user) => { post.Owner = user; return post;});
var post = data.First();
 
post.Content.IsEqualTo("Sams Post1");
post.Id.IsEqualTo(1);
post.Owner.Name.IsEqualTo("Sam");
post.Owner.Id.IsEqualTo(99);
```

**important note** DapraCadapra assumes your Id columns are named "Id" or "id", if your primary key is different or you would like to split the wide row at point other than "Id", use the optional 'splitOn' parameter.

Multiple Results
---------------------
DapraCadapra allows you to process multiple result grids in a single query.

Example:

```csharp
var sql = 
@"
select * from Customers where CustomerId = @id
select * from Orders where CustomerId = @id
select * from Returns where CustomerId = @id";
 
using (var multi = connection.QueryMultiple(sql, new {id=selectedId}))
{
   var customer = multi.Read<Customer>().Single();
   var orders = multi.Read<Order>().ToList();
   var returns = multi.Read<Return>().ToList();
   ...
} 
```

Stored Procedures
---------------------
DapraCadapra fully supports stored procs:

```csharp
var user = cnn.Query<User>("spGetUser", new {Id = 1}, 
        commandType: CommandType.StoredProcedure).SingleOrDefault();
```

If you want something more fancy, you can do:

```csharp
var p = new DynamicParameters();
p.Add("@a", 11);
p.Add("@b", dbType: DbType.Int32, direction: ParameterDirection.Output);
p.Add("@c", dbType: DbType.Int32, direction: ParameterDirection.ReturnValue);

cnn.Execute("spMagicProc", p, commandType: CommandType.StoredProcedure); 

int b = p.Get<int>("@b");
int c = p.Get<int>("@c"); 
```

Ansi Strings and varchar
---------------------
DapraCadapra supports varchar params, if you are executing a where clause on a varchar column using a param be sure to pass it in this way:

```csharp
Query<Thing>("select * from Thing where Name = @Name", new {Name = new DbString { Value = "abcde", IsFixedLength = true, Length = 10, IsAnsi = true });
```

On SQL Server it is crucial to use the unicode when querying unicode and ansi when querying non unicode.

Limitations and caveats
---------------------
DapraCadapra caches information about every query it runs, this allow it to materialize objects quickly and process parameters quickly. The current implementation caches this information in a ConcurrentDictionary object. The objects it stores are never flushed. If you are generating SQL strings on the fly without using parameters it is possible you will hit memory issues. We may convert the dictionaries to an LRU Cache.

DapraCadapra's simplicity means that many feature that ORMs ship with are stripped out, there is no identity map, there are no helpers for update / select and so on.

DapraCadapra does not manage your connection's lifecycle, it assumes the connection it gets is open AND has no existing datareaders enumerating (unless MARS is enabled)

Will DapraCadapra work with my DB provider?
---------------------
DapraCadapra has no DB specific implementation details, it works across all .NET ADO providers including [SQLite](http://www.sqlite.org/), SQL CE, Firebird, Oracle, MySQL, PostgreSQL and SQL Server.

Do you have a comprehensive list of examples?
---------------------
DapraCadapra has a comprehensive test suite in the [test project](https://github.com/StackExchange/DapraCadapra-dot-net/blob/master/DapraCadapra.Tests/Tests.cs)

Who is using this?
---------------------
DapraCadapra is in production use at:

[Stack Overflow](http://stackoverflow.com/), [helpdesk](https://www.jitbit.com/web-helpdesk/)

(if you would like to be listed here let me know)

Commit message:

Updating installation and insert documentation in readme.md

Readme.md, after:

DapraCadapra - a simple object mapper for .Net
========================================

Additions to Dapper Dot Net:
In the core SqlMapper object, I've added 3 methods so far.
Update -- takes parameters of table name, column name, value, and a where calause.
	-- Following stanard Dapper usage, your models shoudl have names matching tables and properties matching columns, so this method could be called like:
	db.update(object.GetType().GetName().ToString(), object.GetProperty("property").GetName().ToString, "value", "field = x");
ExecuteMany -- Works exactly like the Execute method in Dapper, except that it takes a list of strings (where each string is a sql query) and will execute them all on one trip to the database.
Insert -- Pass this method the name of the table you want to insert into, and a dictionary containing the names of the fields and the values for those fields.


Installation
--------------------------------------------
Compile the project and then simply add the dapracadapra.dll file corresponding to your .net version that your project is using as a reference in your project.
Note:  This should also compile fine in Mono, but it has not been tested.

Release Notes
-------------

This project is forked from Dapper Dot Net available at:
[link](http://stackexchange.github.io/DapraCadapra-dot-net/)


Features
--------
DapraCadapra is a [NuGet library](https://www.nuget.org/packages/DapraCadapra) that you can add in to your project that will extend your `IDbConnection` interface.

It provides 3 helpers:

Execute a query and map the results to a strongly typed List
------------------------------------------------------------

Note: all extension methods assume the connection is already open, they will fail if the connection is closed.

```csharp
public static IEnumerable<T> Query<T>(this IDbConnection cnn, string sql, object param = null, SqlTransaction transaction = null, bool buffered = true)
```
Example usage:

```csharp
public class Dog
{
    public int? Age { get; set; }
    public Guid Id { get; set; }
    public string Name { get; set; }
    public float? Weight { get; set; }

    public int IgnoredProperty { get { return 1; } }
}            
            
var guid = Guid.NewGuid();
var dog = connection.Query<Dog>("select Age = @Age, Id = @Id", new { Age = (int?)null, Id = guid });
            
dog.Count()
    .IsEqualTo(1);

dog.First().Age
    .IsNull();

dog.First().Id
    .IsEqualTo(guid);
```

Execute a query and map it to a list of dynamic objects
-------------------------------------------------------

```csharp
public static IEnumerable<dynamic> Query (this IDbConnection cnn, string sql, object param = null, SqlTransaction transaction = null, bool buffered = true)
```
This method will execute SQL and return a dynamic list.

Example usage:

```csharp
var rows = connection.Query("select 1 A, 2 B union all select 3, 4");

((int)rows[0].A)
   .IsEqualTo(1);

((int)rows[0].B)
   .IsEqualTo(2);

((int)rows[1].A)
   .IsEqualTo(3);

((int)rows[1].B)
    .IsEqualTo(4);
```

Execute a Command that returns no results
-----------------------------------------

```csharp
public static int Execute(this IDbConnection cnn, string sql, object param = null, SqlTransaction transaction = null)
```

Example usage:

```csharp
connection.Execute(@"
  set nocount on 
  create table #t(i int) 
  set nocount off 
  insert #t 
  select @a a union all select @b 
  set nocount on 
  drop table #t", new {a=1, b=2 })
   .IsEqualTo(2);
```

Execute a Command multiple times
--------------------------------

The same signature also allows you to conveniently and efficiently execute a command multiple times (for example to bulk-load data)

Example usage:

```csharp
connection.Execute(@"insert MyTable(colA, colB) values (@a, @b)",
    new[] { new { a=1, b=1 }, new { a=2, b=2 }, new { a=3, b=3 } }
  ).IsEqualTo(3); // 3 rows inserted: "1,1", "2,2" and "3,3"
```
This works for any parameter that implements IEnumerable<T> for some T.

Performance
-----------

A key feature of DapraCadapra is performance. The following metrics show how long it takes to execute 500 SELECT statements against a DB and map the data returned to objects.

The performance tests are broken in to 3 lists:

- POCO serialization for frameworks that support pulling static typed objects from the DB. Using raw SQL.
- Dynamic serialization for frameworks that support returning dynamic lists of objects.
- Typical framework usage. Often typical framework usage differs from the optimal usage performance wise. Often it will not involve writing SQL.

### Performance of SELECT mapping over 500 iterations - POCO serialization

<table>
  <tr>
  	<th>Method</th>
		<th>Duration</th>		
		<th>Remarks</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Hand coded (using a <code>SqlDataReader</code>)</td>
		<td>47ms</td>
		<td rowspan="9"><a href="http://www.toptensoftware.com/blog/posts/94-PetaPoco-More-Speed">Can be faster</a></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>DapraCadapra <code>ExecuteMapperQuery<Post></code></td>
		<td>49ms</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td><a href="https://github.com/ServiceStack/ServiceStack.OrmLite">ServiceStack.OrmLite</a> (QueryById)</td>
		<td>50ms</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td><a href="http://www.toptensoftware.com/petapoco/">PetaPoco</a></td>
		<td>52ms</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>BLToolkit</td>
		<td>80ms</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>SubSonic CodingHorror</td>
		<td>107ms</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>NHibernate SQL</td>
		<td>104ms</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Linq 2 SQL <code>ExecuteQuery</code></td>
		<td>181ms</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Entity framework <code>ExecuteStoreQuery</code></td>
		<td>631ms</td>
	</tr>
</table>

### Performance of SELECT mapping over 500 iterations - dynamic serialization

<table>
	<tr>
		<th>Method</th>
		<th>Duration</th>		
		<th>Remarks</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>DapraCadapra <code>ExecuteMapperQuery</code> (dynamic)</td>
		<td>48ms</td>
		<td rowspan="3">&nbsp;</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td><a href="https://github.com/FransBouma/Massive">Massive</a></td>
		<td>52ms</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td><a href="https://github.com/markrendle/Simple.Data">Simple.Data</a></td>
		<td>95ms</td>
	</tr>
</table>


### Performance of SELECT mapping over 500 iterations - typical usage

<table>
	<tr>
		<th>Method</th>
		<th>Duration</th>		
		<th>Remarks</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Linq 2 SQL CompiledQuery</td>
		<td>81ms</td>
		<td>Not super typical involves complex code</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>NHibernate HQL</td>
		<td>118ms</td>
		<td>&nbsp;</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Linq 2 SQL</td>
		<td>559ms</td>
		<td>&nbsp;</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Entity framework</td>
		<td>859ms</td>
		<td>&nbsp;</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>SubSonic ActiveRecord.SingleOrDefault</td>
		<td>3619ms</td>
		<td>&nbsp;</td>
	</tr>
</table>

Performance benchmarks are available [here](https://github.com/StackExchange/DapraCadapra-dot-net/blob/master/DapraCadapra.Tests/PerformanceTests.cs).

Feel free to submit patches that include other ORMs - when running benchmarks, be sure to compile in Release and not attach a debugger (ctrl F5).

Alternatively, you might prefer Frans Bouma's [RawDataAccessBencher](https://github.com/FransBouma/RawDataAccessBencher) test suite.

Parameterized queries
---------------------

Parameters are passed in as anonymous classes. This allow you to name your parameters easily and gives you the ability to simply cut-and-paste SQL snippets and run them in Query analyzer.

```csharp
new {A = 1, B = "b"} // A will be mapped to the param @A, B to the param @B 
```

List Support
------------
DapraCadapra allow you to pass in IEnumerable<int> and will automatically parameterize your query.

For example:

```csharp
connection.Query<int>("select * from (select 1 as Id union all select 2 union all select 3) as X where Id in @Ids", new { Ids = new int[] { 1, 2, 3 });
```

Will be translated to:

```csharp
select * from (select 1 as Id union all select 2 union all select 3) as X where Id in (@Ids1, @Ids2, @Ids3)" // @Ids1 = 1 , @Ids2 = 2 , @Ids2 = 3
```

Buffered vs Unbuffered readers
---------------------
DapraCadapra's default behavior is to execute your sql and buffer the entire reader on return. This is ideal in most cases as it minimizes shared locks in the db and cuts down on db network time.

However when executing huge queries you may need to minimize memory footprint and only load objects as needed. To do so pass, buffered: false into the Query method.

Multi Mapping
---------------------
DapraCadapra allows you to map a single row to multiple objects. This is a key feature if you want to avoid extraneous querying and eager load associations.

Example:

```csharp
var sql = 
@"select * from #Posts p 
left join #Users u on u.Id = p.OwnerId 
Order by p.Id";
 
var data = connection.Query<Post, User, Post>(sql, (post, user) => { post.Owner = user; return post;});
var post = data.First();
 
post.Content.IsEqualTo("Sams Post1");
post.Id.IsEqualTo(1);
post.Owner.Name.IsEqualTo("Sam");
post.Owner.Id.IsEqualTo(99);
```

**important note** DapraCadapra assumes your Id columns are named "Id" or "id", if your primary key is different or you would like to split the wide row at point other than "Id", use the optional 'splitOn' parameter.

Multiple Results
---------------------
DapraCadapra allows you to process multiple result grids in a single query.

Example:

```csharp
var sql = 
@"
select * from Customers where CustomerId = @id
select * from Orders where CustomerId = @id
select * from Returns where CustomerId = @id";
 
using (var multi = connection.QueryMultiple(sql, new {id=selectedId}))
{
   var customer = multi.Read<Customer>().Single();
   var orders = multi.Read<Order>().ToList();
   var returns = multi.Read<Return>().ToList();
   ...
} 
```

Stored Procedures
---------------------
DapraCadapra fully supports stored procs:

```csharp
var user = cnn.Query<User>("spGetUser", new {Id = 1}, 
        commandType: CommandType.StoredProcedure).SingleOrDefault();
```

If you want something more fancy, you can do:

```csharp
var p = new DynamicParameters();
p.Add("@a", 11);
p.Add("@b", dbType: DbType.Int32, direction: ParameterDirection.Output);
p.Add("@c", dbType: DbType.Int32, direction: ParameterDirection.ReturnValue);

cnn.Execute("spMagicProc", p, commandType: CommandType.StoredProcedure); 

int b = p.Get<int>("@b");
int c = p.Get<int>("@c"); 
```

Ansi Strings and varchar
---------------------
DapraCadapra supports varchar params, if you are executing a where clause on a varchar column using a param be sure to pass it in this way:

```csharp
Query<Thing>("select * from Thing where Name = @Name", new {Name = new DbString { Value = "abcde", IsFixedLength = true, Length = 10, IsAnsi = true });
```

On SQL Server it is crucial to use the unicode when querying unicode and ansi when querying non unicode.

Limitations and caveats
---------------------
DapraCadapra caches information about every query it runs, this allow it to materialize objects quickly and process parameters quickly. The current implementation caches this information in a ConcurrentDictionary object. The objects it stores are never flushed. If you are generating SQL strings on the fly without using parameters it is possible you will hit memory issues. We may convert the dictionaries to an LRU Cache.

DapraCadapra's simplicity means that many feature that ORMs ship with are stripped out, there is no identity map, there are no helpers for update / select and so on.

DapraCadapra does not manage your connection's lifecycle, it assumes the connection it gets is open AND has no existing datareaders enumerating (unless MARS is enabled)

Will DapraCadapra work with my DB provider?
---------------------
DapraCadapra has no DB specific implementation details, it works across all .NET ADO providers including [SQLite](http://www.sqlite.org/), SQL CE, Firebird, Oracle, MySQL, PostgreSQL and SQL Server.

Do you have a comprehensive list of examples?
---------------------
DapraCadapra has a comprehensive test suite in the [test project](https://github.com/StackExchange/DapraCadapra-dot-net/blob/master/DapraCadapra.Tests/Tests.cs)

Who is using this?
---------------------
DapraCadapra is in production use at:

[Stack Overflow](http://stackoverflow.com/), [helpdesk](https://www.jitbit.com/web-helpdesk/)

(if you would like to be listed here let me know)
